Lecture 2: Language             Model

        CS6493 Natural Language Processing
         Instructor: Linqi Song and Chen Ma
Outline

 ●  1. Language model definition & applications
 ●  2. Model construction
     ○  Statistical language models
     ○  Neural language models
 ●  3. Language model evaluation


                                                                  2
The famous infinite monkey theorem

  ●  The famous infinite monkey theorem
       ○  A monkey hitting keys at random on a typewriter keyboard for an infinite amount of time will almost 
          surely type any given text, such as Hamlet or even the complete works of William Shakespeare.
       ○  How can we judge the performance of each typing?


                                                                                      3
What is a language model?

 ●  A language model is a probability distribution over sequences of words. Given such a 
    sequence, say of length T, it assigns a probability 푃(푥(1), 푥(2), … 푥(푇)) to the whole 
    sequence.

 ●  To determine whether a given ordering of words sounds like natural language.

     E.g., two orderings 
     ‘NLP is about how machines understand and process natural languages.’
     ‘machines NLP about languages understand how and is natural process.’


                                                                  4
Another interpretation of a language model

 ●  The task of language models could be regarded as assigning probability to a piece of 
    text. 
 ●  For example, consider a piece of text (푥(1), 푥(2), … 푥(푇)), then according to the 
    Langugage Model, the probability of the text could be written as: 


         A language model can also be interpreted as predicting what word comes next
                                                                  5
Why we care about language modeling?

●  It serves as a benchmark task that helps us to measure our progress on
   understanding language
●  It is a subcomponant of many NLP tasks, especially those involving generating text 
   and estimating the probability of the text:
    ○  predictive typing
    ○  speech recognition
    ○  handwriting recognition
    ○  spelling / grammar correction
    ○  authorship identification
    ○  machine translation
    ○  summarization
    ○  dialogue...

                                                                 6
Language models in our daily life (1)


                                                7
Language models in our daily          life (2)

Speech recognition


        I ate a cherry.                Eye eight uh Jerry.

        Birds can fly in the sky.      Beards can fly in the sky.

        Recognize speech.              Wretch a nice beach.


                                                                                     8
Language modeling

 ●  The task to predict what word comes next.


 ●  Given a sequence of words                             ; compute the probability 
    distribution of the next word            :


    where           could be any word in the vocabulary 

 ●  Learning this language model is called Language Modeling.     9
n-gram model  assumption

●  Markov assumption:            depends only on the preceding n-1 words.


●  Get these n-gram and (n-1)-gram probabilities by counting them in some 
   large corpus of texts.


                                                                10
n-gram model

●  Every word in Σ is assigned some probability, conditoned on a fixed-length history (n 
   – 1).
●  An n-gram is a chunk of n consecutive words.


                                                                11
Unigram model

 ●  Every word in the vocabulary Σ is assigned some probability.
 ●  Random variables 푥(1), 푥(2), … 푥(푇) (one per word).

               1   2    푇     푇     푡  1   2     푡−1    푇     푡
            푃 푥  , 푥 , … 푥 = Π푡=1푃 푥 |푥  , 푥 , … , 푥 = Π푡=1푃 푥
                           푥 0 =< 푠 >, starting symbol

    Defficiency of the model: hard to distinguish muiti-word phrases.

    E.g.: “Artificial Intelligence is the electricity for the new era. ”

    Here ‘Artificial’ and ‘Intelligence’ are considered as two separate word, while the semantic 
    linkage between them are much stronger than other adjacent word pairs in the sentence.


                                                                                    12
Unigram distribution examples

                                      Generate texts by selecting the 
                                      word with a certain probability as 
                                      the next output word. 


 Probability distribution of a unigram model Text generated from a unigram model 13
Full history model

●  Every word in Σ is assigned some probability, conditioned on every history.

                  1 2   푇    푇   푡  1  2   푡−1
               푃 푥 , 푥 , … 푥 = Π푡=1푃 푥 |푥 , 푥 , … , 푥

   A text generation example of a full history model:


                                                                14
Problems with n-gram


                                                15
Sparsity problems with n-gram

                                               Note:

                                               Increasing n makes 
                                               sparsity problems 
                                               worse.

                                               Typically we can’t have 
                                               n bigger than 5.


                                                                16
Storge problems with n-gram


Note:

Increasing corpus increases the model size. 


                                                                17
n-gram in text generation

●  A passage generated with a 3-gram model:


●  Well grammarly-structured.
●  But incoherent, as each calculation only considers 3 continuous words.
●  Yet increasing n brings sparsity and storage problems.
●  Solution: window-based neural network. 


                                                                18
 A fixed-window neural language model
Y. Bengio, et al. (2003): A Neural Probabilistic Language Model

                                                              Improvements over n-gram:
                                                               ●  No sparsity problem
                                                               ●  Don’t need to store all 
                                                                  observed n-grams

                                                              Remaining problems:
                                                               ●  Fixed window is too small.
                                                               ●  Enlarging window enlarges 
                                                                  푾; Window can never be 
                                                                  large enough.
                                                               ●     and       are multiplied 
                                                                  by completely different 
                                                                  weights in 푾. No 
                                                                  symmetry in how the 
                                                                  inputs are processed.

                                                                                     19
One hot encoding and word embeddings


   One hot encoding            Word embeddings

                                                20
Recall of Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs)

●  Recurrent units: blocks share the structure and parameters (weights)
●  Flexible input / output size
●  Self-connections or connections to units in the previous layers
●  Short-term memory


                                                                21
RNN block


                                                22
RNN   block   concatenation


●   Another form: usually use hidden state ℎ푡
                                                                                    23
Activation    functions


Soft switch
to control signal flow strength
                                                  Squash
                                                  to normalize values to be between 0 and 1


                                Activation functions                                24
RNN-based   language  model

                                           RNN Advantages:

                                            ●  Can process any length input
                                            ●  Computation for step t can 
                                               (in theory) use information 
                                               from many steps back
                                            ●  Model size doesn’t increase 
                                               for longer input
                                            ●  Same weights applied on 
                                               every timestep, so there is 
                                               symmetry in how inputs are 
                                               processed.

                                                                     25
Training an RNN-LM

●  Get a big corpus of text which is a sequence of words
●  Feed into RNN-LM; compute output distribution for every step t.
   i.e., predict probability distribution of every word, given words so far
●  Loss function on step t: cross-entropy between predicted probability 
   distribution     , and the true next word      (one-hot for         ): 


●  Average the result above to get overall loss for entire training set: 


                                                                26
Training an RNN-LM

●  Computing loss and gradients across entire corpus is too expensive.


●  In practice, consider                     as a sentence (document).
●  Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) allows us to compute loss and gradients 
   for small chunks of data, and update.
●  Compute loss for a sentence (actually a batch of sentences) using SGD, 
   compute gradients and update weights. Repeat.


                                                                27
Backpropagation through time


●  How to calculate the derivatives of 퐽(휃) with respect to the repeated weight 
   matrix      through time            ?
●  Hints: multivariable chain rule.


                                                                28
  Vanishing/Exploding gradient

  Loss function of RNN

                   In the case of a recurrent neural network, the loss function of all time steps is defined 
                   based on the loss at every time step, e.g., cross entropy loss.

  Backpropagation through time

                   Backpropagation is done at each point in time.
                   푊: weight matrix
                   푇: the T-th timestamp

When 푇 is large enough, the result of the multiplied gradient 
could increase/decrease exponentially with respect to the 
number of layers, leading to ineffective weight updates. 

Question: What’s the possible influence of gradient vanishing/exploding? 29
Long-term dependency in NLP

 ●  LM task: When she tried to print her tickets, she found that the printer was out of toner. She went to the 
    stationery store to buy more toner. It was very overpriced. After installing the toner into the printer, she 
    finally printed her ________.


 ●  To learn from this training example, the model needs to model the dependency between “tickets” on the 
    7th step and the target word “tickets” at the end.
 ●  If gradient is small, the model can’t learn this dependency
 ●  So the model is unable to predict similar long-distance dependencies at test time


                                                                                    30
Long Short-Term Memory (1)

●  Long Short-Term Memory, a special RNN to slove vanish gradient 
   phenomenon (Hochreiter and Schmidhuber, 1997).
●  Instead of adding up the history, it uses a set of gating units to control the 
   memory.

                                               : input gate

                                               : forget gate

                                               : output gate

                                               : new content of input t

                                               : cell state

                                               : hidden state

                                                                31
Long Short-Term Memory (2)


                                                           Source: 
                                                           http://colah.github.io/posts/201
                                                           5-08-Understanding-LSTMs/

                                                                                    32
GRU
●  A simpler version of LSTM introduced by Cho et al. in 2014
●  Fewer gates, less computation
●  Replace the forget gate (   ) with
●  On each timestep t we have input and hidden state (no cell state).

                                                : input gate
                                                : reset gate
                                                : new hidden state content
                                                : hidden state


                                                                33
How LSTM solves vanishing gradient / long-term dependency?

The LSTM architecture makes it easier for the RNN to preserve information over 
many timesteps

●  e.g., if the forget gate is set to 1 for a cell dimension and the input gate set to 
   0, then the information of that cell is preserved indefinitely.
●  By contrast, it’s harder for traditional RNNs to learn a recurrent weight matrix 

   푊ℎ that preserves info in hidden state.
Open questions: does LSTM solve the vanishing/exploding gradient problem? 
Maybe because of its gated design.


Refer to Chung, J., Gulcehre, C., Cho, K., & Bengio, Y. (2014). Empirical evaluation of gated recurrent neural networks on sequence 
modeling. arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.3555.
                                                                34
Apply RNN-LM: text generation

 ●   Just like a uni-gram / n-gram Language Model, you can use an RNN Language Model 
     to generate text by repeated sampling. Sampled output is next step’s input.


     The United States will step up to the cost of 
     a new challenges of the American people “The Malfoys!” said Hermione.
     that will share the fact that we created the 
     problem. They were attacked and so that Harry was watching him. He looked like 
     they have to say that all the task of the final Madame Maxime. When she strode up the 
     days of war that I will not be able to get this wrong staircase to visit himself...
     done. ...

     An example generated by Obama-RNN     A Harry Potter chapter generated by LSTM-RNN
     Source: https://medium.com/@samim/obama-rnn-machine- Source: https://medium.com/deep-writing/harry-potter-written-by-
     generated-political-speeches-c8abd18a2ea0 artificial-intelligence-8a9431803da6
                                                                               35
More examples with RNN-LM

 ●  Recipe generator:
    https://gist.github.com/nylki/1efbaa36635956d35bcc
      ○  Follow the typical format of a recipe
      ○  RNN has the ability to learn the format of materials

 ●  Color name generator:
    https://colornamer.robertcooper.me/
      ○  a character-level RNN-LM (predicts what character comes next)


                                                                                    36
Evaluating language models

●  The standard evaluation metrics for LM is perplexity.


●  Perplexity can be derived directly from the cross-entropy loss 퐽(휃):


●  Lower perplexity is better.                                  37
Model performance comparison (1)


                            Perplexity improves (lower is better)

                                                                38
     Model performance comparison (2)


                                                           LSTM       <   RNN      <  n-gram                 Perplexity improves 

                                                                                                             (lower is better)                 39
https://engineering.fb.com/2016/10/25/ml-applications/building-an-efficient-neural-language-model-over-a-billion-words/
    Model performance comparison (3)


                                                                                                                  40
https://paperswithcode.com/sota/language-modelling-on-wikitext-103
LM in more complex tasks – machine translation


                                                41
LM in more complex tasks - NER


                                                42
LM in more complex tasks - QA


                                                43
LM in more complex tasks - speech recognition


                                                44
Thanks for your attention!


                        45